🔹 1. What is Docker and how does it work?
Docker is a containerization platform that allows developers to package applications with all their dependencies into a single container. It works using the Docker Engine, which creates, manages, and runs containers using the host OS kernel.

🔹 2. Difference between a container and a virtual machine?
Feature	       Container	             Virtual Machine
OS	          Shares host OS             kernel	Has its own guest OS
Size	       Lightweight (MBs)	       Heavyweight (GBs)
Boot time	    Seconds	                 Minutes
Performance	   Faster	                 Slower due to OS virtualization

🔹 3. What is the difference between Docker Image and Docker Container?
Image is a read-only template with instructions for creating a container.

Container is a runtime instance of an image (with state and process).

🔹 4. How do you create a Docker image?
Usually by writing a Dockerfile and using the command:

bash
Copy
Edit
docker build -t my-image-name .
🔹 5. What is a Dockerfile?
A text file that contains instructions (like FROM, COPY, RUN, etc.) to build a Docker image.

🔹 6. What are common instructions used in a Dockerfile?
FROM – Base image

COPY / ADD – Add files to image

RUN – Execute commands inside image

CMD / ENTRYPOINT – Define default container execution

EXPOSE – Inform about port

WORKDIR – Set working directory

🔹 7. How do you check running containers?
bash
Copy
Edit
docker ps
🔹 8. How do you stop and remove a container?
bash
Copy
Edit
docker stop <container_id>
docker rm <container_id>
🔹 9. How do you persist data in Docker?
Use Volumes or Bind Mounts:

bash
Copy
Edit
docker run -v myvolume:/data myimage
🔹 10. What is the difference between CMD and ENTRYPOINT?
CMD can be overridden by command line arguments.

ENTRYPOINT sets the fixed command, arguments are appended.

🔹 11. What is a Docker Volume?
A persistent storage mechanism used to store data outside the container’s filesystem.

🔹 12. What is the purpose of .dockerignore file?
It prevents certain files/folders from being included in the Docker build context.

🔹 13. What is Docker Compose?
A tool for defining and managing multi-container Docker applications using a YAML file (docker-compose.yml).

🔹 14. How do you scale services using Docker Compose?
bash
Copy
Edit
docker-compose up --scale web=3
🔹 15. How do you debug a Docker container?
docker logs <container_id>

docker exec -it <container_id> /bin/bash

Check container health with docker inspect

🔹 16. How do you update a running container?
You can't update it directly. You:

Stop and remove the old container

Build new image and run it

🔹 17. How do you handle environment variables in Docker?
Using -e option: docker run -e VAR=value myimage

From .env file in Docker Compose

🔹 18. What are Docker networking modes?
Bridge (default)

Host

None

Overlay (used in Swarm)

🔹 19. What are some security practices you follow with Docker?
Use minimal base images (e.g., alpine)

Regularly scan images for vulnerabilities (e.g., Trivy, Snyk)

Avoid running containers as root

Use signed images from trusted registries

🔹 20. How do you manage secrets in Docker?
Avoid putting secrets in Dockerfile or ENV

Use Docker Secrets (in Swarm) or tools like HashiCorp Vault, AWS Secrets Manager

🔹 21. How do you reduce Docker image size?
Use multi-stage builds

Remove unnecessary dependencies

Use smaller base images (alpine)

Clean up cache after install

🔹 22. Explain multi-stage builds.
A way to build smaller and more secure images by using intermediate stages:

dockerfile
Copy
Edit
FROM node:16 as builder
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .
RUN npm install && npm run build

FROM nginx:alpine
COPY --from=builder /app/dist /usr/share/nginx/html
🔹 23. What is the difference between COPY and ADD in Dockerfile?
COPY – copies files/directories

ADD – same as COPY but also extracts archives and supports remote URLs

🔹 24. How do you push an image to Docker Hub?
bash
Copy
Edit
docker tag myimage username/myimage:latest
docker push username/myimage:latest
🔹 25. Have you used any tools to scan Docker images?
Yes, tools like:

Trivy – Fast and easy to integrate

Grype – CVE scanning

Snyk – Vulnerability scanning with remediation

Docker Scout – Native Docker security

🔹26.A container keeps restarting — how do you troubleshoot?
  I check logs using docker logs <id> to see the error, inspect the restart policy with docker inspect, and run the container interactively using --entrypoint /bin/bash to debug inside.
Most issues are due to missing configs or app crashes.
🔹27.Image size is too large — how do you optimize it?
I use smaller base images like alpine, apply multi-stage builds, clean up temp files, combine RUN layers, and use .dockerignore to avoid unnecessary files.
✅ 28. Best practices for handling secrets in Docker?
I never store secrets in Dockerfiles. I inject them at runtime via environment variables or secret managers like Vault or AWS Secrets Manager. In Swarm, I use Docker Secrets.
✅ 29. Difference between ENTRYPOINT and CMD?
ENTRYPOINT defines the fixed command. CMD provides default arguments. CMD can be overridden at runtime, but ENTRYPOINT always runs unless manually changed.
✅ 30  What is the purpose of a multi-stage Dockerfile?
The purpose of a multi-stage Dockerfile is to build smaller, cleaner, and more secure images by separating the build environment from the final image.
✅ 31 What does ENTRYPOINT do in Docker?
 ✅ 32 Difference between ENTRYPOINT and CMD?
CMD		: to execute linux commands(container creation)
ENTRYPOINT	: high priority than CMD
✅ 33 Difference between COPY and ADD in Docker?
COPY		: it will copy local files to conatiner.
ADD		: it will copy internet files to conatiner.
34.How do you pass environment variables during Docker build commands? What services do you use for storing Docker images?
